PARISH OF DRUMBEG.
  
Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41

Modern Topography  Dunmurry Unitarian Meeting House  Dunmurry Unitarian meeting house is situated on a very handsome site in the village of Dunmurry.  It is an oblong structure, 1-storey high and slated, measuring 40 and a half by 30 and a half feet inside, walls of stone and lime, 2 feet thick, cornices of cut stone, and doors and windows cased with the same. Entrance by 2 large doors in front, and a third opening in the rear from the session house. It is well lit by 3 large arch windows in front, 1 large arch window on each gable and 2 small arch windows in the rear.  The aisles are flagged and the pew floors laid with boards. There are 3 neat galleries, 1 on the front side and 1 on each end, and all supported in front on timber columns.  The pulpit stands against the back side wall and elevated some feet above the floor, and opposite to it, in the front of the side gallery, a handsome clock.  The house is also furnished with a stove.  Passage to the galleries by a staircase in each end of the house.  Pews on the ground floor 47, single seats 54; each averages 9 feet 3 inches and will hold persons each seat, 6. Total persons accommodated on the ground floor 324. Seats on the galleries 32; of these, there are 26 averages 9 and a half feet each, and will hold persons each seat 6, total 156.  6 seats are 13 feet 4 inches each and will hold persons each seat 9, total 54.  Total persons accommodated with seats in the house 534, allowing 1 and a half feet to each sitting. The interior is spacious, well-lit, and all furniture in good order.  Divine service commences here at 12 o'clock noon.  The Reverend Henry Montgomery of Belfast is minister.  Attached to the rear of the meeting house stands a session house, 1-storey high and slated.It measures 19 and a half by 15 and a half feet inside and is lit by 3 oblong windows.  The following inscription is cut on 2 neat corniced stones in front of the meeting house: 1, "This house was rebuilt at the expense of the congregation of Dunmurry, 1779".  2, "Reverend James Stouppe A.M., minister".  The house is permanently built and the site eligible.  There are 6 steps of cut stone ascending [to] the front doors.  .

Names in Unitarian Burial Ground  The yard is enclosed by a good quickset fence and sheltered by forest trees, entrance from the road by a good iron gate. The grounds is partly occupied by burials and contain a large number of handsome headstones and 2 tombs.  The following are among the Christian names and surnames on the tombs and headstones.  Names of males: Alexander, Charles, Daniel, Robert, William, Hugh, Joseph, James, Nathaniel, John, Lance, Thomas, Isaac.  Names of females: Mary Ann, Mary, Elizabeth, Margaret, Elenor, Martha, Jane, Mathilda, Sarah, Isobella. Surnames on tombstones and headstones in Dunmurry: Ireland, Hall, Murray, Shane, Auchinleck, Radcliffe, Boyd, Collins, Swan, Johnston, Cunningham, Carmichael, Mc  Clean, Camac, Fair, Mc  Gee, Anderson, Craig, Herd, Spence, Gilliland, Gray, Wiley, Caldwell, Mc  Cullock, Cooper, Mc  Master, Bamford, Hunter, Martin, Stewart, Mc  Kibben, Wallace. The oldest age appearing on any of the stones is 84 years.  There is no old stones in the yard, but those that are in it are very neatly cut and the yard in clean order.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography .

Bridges in DunmurryJohn Mc  Henry  Dunmurry bridge, on the leading road to Belfast, has 2 arches, span of each 12 feet 6 inches.  Breadth of the road on the bridge 21 feet, average height of parapets on the bridge 4 feet, thickness of parapets 1 foot 6 inches, length of parapets on either side of the road 30 yards, and all in good order at present.  Dunmurry bridge, on the turnpike road leading from Lisburn to Belfast, has 2 circular arches, span of each 13 feet 6 inches. Breadth of the road on the bridge 43 feet, average height of parapets on the bridge 2 feet 6 inches, thickness of parapets 1 foot 6 inches, length of parapets on either side of the road 55 yards.  There is a small arch that accommodates a mill-race, detached from the others. The bridge and parapets are all in good order, and a large portion of them built of cut stone; engineer the late Mr Larkin of Dublin. Informant John Mc  Henry and others, 17th October 1837. Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography  .

Dunmurry Village  Dunmurry is a small village situated about 3 miles north of Lisburn, on the old road leading to Belfast.  The turnpike and railroads also pass through it.  It is situated in a fertile and well improved part of the neighbourhood, and is the seat of an extensive bleach green, also of a corn and flour mill, and likewise the handsome Unitarian meeting house.  In its neighbourhood also stand several handsome and well improved seats.  The following are the trades and occupations, and the number and height of houses in the village: gentleman 1, ladies 1, office clerks 3, gardeners 2, bleachers 1, flour millers 1, corn millers 1, postmasters 1, publicans 1, boot and shoemakers 2, tailors 2, cartmakers 1, smiths 1, masons 1, carpenters 1, sextons 1, labourers 13, total trades and callings 34.  2-storey houses 8, 1-storey houses 23, total houses 31. Slated houses 19, thatched houses 12, total houses 31 and all inhabited.  Buildings not included above: meeting house, schoolhouse, flour mill and stores, corn mill and stores, bleaching houses.  The village is well supplied in river and spring water. It also possesses a good freestone quarry, where there is at present upwards of 100 artisans and labourers employed, quarrying and preparing stones for the use of the railroad now making between Lisburn and Belfast. 18th October 1837 .  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography  .

Flour and Corn MillsRobert Swan and Bernard Murray Dunmurry flour and corn mills is situated in the village of Dunmurry and attached to each other, proprietor William Hunter of Dunmurry, Esquire.  The buildings occupied in the above business is all slated, and about 200 feet in length of them 4-storeys high.  On the same ground also stands a lapping house 2-storeys high and slated.  Attached to the flour works stands a steam engine of 16 horsepower, over which is a lofty brick chimney.  This steam engine was erected to accommodate flour grinding in cases of insufficiency of water to drive the water wheels.  It drives 2 pairs of stones.  The flour mill water wheel is breast, diameter 24 feet, breadth of wheel 6 feet, fall of water scarce observable.  This wheel drives 2 pairs of stones occupied in the flour works.  The corn mill water wheel is also breast, diameter 20 feet, breadth of wheel 5 feet, fall of water scarce observable.  This wheel drives 2 pairs of stones occupied in grinding meal, and occasionally <occationally> a third pair of stones occupied in the flour works.  On the whole there is 5 pairs of stones for the flour works and 2 pairs for the corn mill. The building and machinery are in neat order and the flour business carried on constant. The water is limited in dry or frosty weather, but the steam engine enables the work to be carried on under all circumstances.  The quantity of wheat annually manufactured into flour in this establishment averages 1,100 tons.  The chief part of the wheat is grown in the neighbourhood of Dunmurry and purchased at the mills.  There is a considerable quantity of oats annually manufactured into meal at the corn mill.  The flour miller has 21s per week, the corn miller 9s per week and 6 labourers constantly employed in the establishments at 7s per week each.  The entire buildings were erected from time to time within the last 60 years by the late William Hunter of Dunmurry, Esquire and his offspring.  There was originally a corn mill and a flax mill on the site, but the flax was disused above 60 years back and the corn mill subsequently enlarged. Informants Robert Swan and Bernard Murry. 19th October 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography  .

Dunmurry, a Seat  James Hunter Esquire, John CraigDunm urry, the seat of Alexander Hunter Esquire, is situated on a very handsome eminence at the village of Dunmurry.  The house is a commodious double house, 2-storeys high and slated, entrance from the village by 2 good iron gates.  The garden, about 1 English acre, is enclosed partly by a stone and brick and partly by a quickset fence.  The grounds about the house is sheltered and ornamented by a variety of forest trees, laurels and evergreens.  The garden contains a handsome greenhouse 60 feet long. The demesne, about 30 English acres, is laid off in well enclosed fields and contain partial plantations of different kinds of forest trees.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography  -.

Bleach Green in Dunmurry  These grounds are also the seat of an extensive bleach green.  The business is carried on by the above Mr Hunter. The above house was rebuilt and considerably enlarged by William Hunter Esquire about 1802, and the bleach green established by his father, the late William Hunter of Dunmurry, Esquire, above 90 years ago. The buildings occupied in the bleaching business are extensive, all slated and the chief part of them 2-storeys high.  The wash mill water wheel is breast, diameter 20 feet, breadth of wheel 5 feet, fall of water scarce observable.  This wheel drives 4 feet of wash mills and 6 pairs of rub boards.  The engine water wheel is breast, diameter 20 feet, breadth of wheel 4 feet 8 inches, fall of water scarce observable.  This wheel drives 2 double engines and 4 feet of wash mills.  The water is limited here in dry summers.  The ground occupied by the bleaching business contain 26 English acres and is eligibly situated for the business.  There is an average of 11,000 linen webs annually bleached here and 50 labourers in almost constant employ. Their weekly wages rate according to their different employments.  Information obtained from James Hunter Esquire and John Craig, foreman bleacher. 20th and 21st October 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography .

Meeting House in Dunmurry  Robert Swan, William Miniss The grounds on which Dunmurry Unitarian meeting house is situate contain between 5 and 6 English acres, and is held on lease renewable for ever under Lord Donegall <Donogal> at a small annual rent. It affords a small farm on which is situated a neat cottage for the accommodation of the minister for the time being.  There is a good schoolhouse also on the grounds.  Dr Montgomery of Belfast is present minister, and gets annual stipend 100 pounds, royal bounty 100 pounds.  There is liberal collections on Sundays, which is occasionally given to 40 poor. Informants Robert Swan, William Miniss and others. Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography .

Glenburn, a Seat  Thomas Wallace, James FinlayGlenburn, the seat of Major Crossley, is situated about 3 miles north of Lisburn, east of the turnpike road leading from the latter town to Belfast and in a very handsome part of the neighbourhood.  The house is a spacious, oblong building, 2-storeys high and slated.There is a handsome wing to the south end and additional buildings in the rear, and over the hall door a portico of  cut stone.  At the south end of the house is situated a very neat greenhouse for rearing grapes and plants. The yards and offices are remarkably neat and extensive.  The ground in front of the house is very handsomely laid off with shrubberies, avenues and gravel walks, and all in the neatest order.  The garden, about 1 Irish acre, is detached from the house and enclosed partly by a neat fence and partly by a stone and lime wall, and well stocked with fruit trees etc. and sheltered by partial plan ting.  There are 2 entrances to the house, one from the road above mentioned by a very handsome, winding avenue, and a second from the old Malone Road between Belfast and Lisburn.  At each entrance is a neat porter's lodge. The house is situated in a very handsome valley, surmounted on all sides by beautiful sloping hills, the summits of which are covered with thriving <triveing> plantations.  The demesne, containing 75 English acres, is well sheltered and enclosed with good quickset fences and the seat of extensive young and grown plantations.  Contiguous on the south side of the house is a most beautiful water dam ornamented by planting, a neat pleasure boat and a number of swans.  On the south bank of it is situated a neat tea house surrounded by a parcel of ground laid off in garden-like manner.  This dam accommodates a bleach green situated a short distance east of the house.  It renders an ornament to the place.  Besides, it is inhabited by wildfowl and fish.  On the north ea st side of the house is also situated a small but handsome lake called the Spring Pond.  It is inhabited by trout, eel and tench, a sort of small fish brought to it from England by Mr Edward Curtis, the proprietor of the property.  Though situated on low ground, this is perhaps one of the most picturesque and eligible situations in the above county and the house one of the most commodious. It took its name from a winding river that passes through the grounds and locally called the Glen burn.  The original house and the bleach green was founded by the late John Wolfenden Esquire above 90 years back, and subsequently occupied by Mr Hogg, next by a Mr Darby, who enlarged the house, but latterly by Edward Curtis Esquire, the present proprietor of the property.  He considerably enlarged the house 21 years ago and made all the plantings and other improvements on the premises.  Major Crossley got the place as tenant, 1835.  Informants Thomas Wallace, James Finlay and others, 23rd October 1837.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography.

Glenburn Bleach Green  John Bell, Thomas Wallace  Glenburn bleach green is occupied by William Hunter Junior of Dunmurry.  This green is situated on Glenburn demesne about 3 miles north of Lisburn, and in a very eligible situation for the business.The bleach grounds contain 30 English acres. The buildings occupied in the above business and situated in the green are all slated, and 60 yards in length of them 2-storeys high and the remainder 1-storey high.  The engine water wheel is breast, diameter 14 feet, breadth of wheel 6 feet, fall of water about 7 feet.  This wheel drives 2 double engines. The wash mill wheel is breast, diameter 24 feet, breadth of wheel 4 feet 8 inches, fall of water scarce observable. This wheel drives 6 feet of wash mills and 3 pairs of rub boards.  There is a second engine house detached from the green.  It is thatched, 1-storey high and 17 yards in length.  The engines were erected in it 1836, by the above Mr Hunter.  The water wheel is breast, diameter 15 feet 8 inches, breadth of wheel 6 feet 8 inches, fall of water scarce observable.  This wheel drives 2 single engines, and a constant supply of water at the entire building and all the works in good order.  There is an average of 11,000 linen webs annually bleached and 28 men constantly employed at 7s per week each, and a foreman at 100 pounds per annum.  This green is said to have been established above 90 years ago by the late John Wolfenden Esquire. 25th October 1837.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography  ".

Glenburn Forge, Fort and Tea House The grounds was the seat of an ancient iron forge, which gave the name of Old Forge to the townland in which the green is situated.  On the ground stood also a Danish fort, which has been destroyed about 25 years ago, but nothing remarkable got about it.  Mr Hunter is erecting a neat tea house on the bleach green.  Informants John Bell, Thomas Wallace and others.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography.

Roads  John Dimond  That portion of the Malone Road leading from Belfast to Lisburn and situated in the above parish is 21 feet wide clear of banks or fences, and kept up by presentments.  That portion of the Old or Falls Road leading from Belfast to Lisburn by Dunmurry and situated in the above parish, averages 21 feet clear of banks or fences, and is kept up by presentment. Informants John Dimond and others, 27th October 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography.

Drum BridgeJonathon Brown, Robert Rainey  Drumbeg bridge, across the Lagan on the old Malone Road between Lisburn and Belfast, has 3 circular arches; span of middle arch 22 feet, span of each of the outside arches 19 feet. On the south side and detached are 2 arches to serve in cases of high floods in the river; span of north arch of these 12 feet, span of south arch of these 10 feet 6 inches.  On the north side and detached from the main bridge are 4 arches, also to serve in cases of high floods; span of the south arch of these 14 feet, span of each of the other 3, 13 feet. Average breadth of the road on the bridge 31 feet, average height of parapets 3 feet, thickness of parapets 1 foot 6, length of parapets on either side of the road 130 yards.  Length of the main bridge 24 yards, length between the 2 extreme ends of the entire bridge 84 yards.  This bridge forms a communication between the counties of Antrim and Down, and is locally said to have been built at the expense of both counties previous to 1690, but then built on the old narrow construction, and widened 15 feet on the west side about 35 years ago.  Who the original engineer was is not known, but the engineer who put the addition to it was the late John Lamb.  The entire work is of whinstone and the workmanship well executed. The arches seem in permanent condition, but the parapets are partly dilapidated and in some parts split, very likely from the extraordinary age of the old part of the work. 30th October 1837.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography  .

Bridge across Canal Jonathon Brown, Robert Rainey  Immediately adjoining the aforesaid bridge, on the Antrim side and across a portion of the canal situated in the abovecounty, there stands a bridge having 1 segment arch, span 17 feet.  Average breadth of the road on bridge 31 feet 6 inches, average height of parapets 3 feet, thickness of parapets 1 foot 6.  This bridge is built chiefly of whinstone and in good order.  The original part of it is said to have been built at the expense of the navigation company above 80 years ago and widened 18 feet on the west side by the same company 35 years ago.  On the north side and detached from the above bridge stands 2 arches of 7 span each.  They are to accommodate a tail-race coming from an old bleach green in the neighbourhood.  The parapets on the latter is the same height and thickness as those above described.  All the aforesaid arches are situated in a line on the Malone Road leading from Lisburn to Belfast.  Information obtained from Jonathon Brown and Robert Rainey and others.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography  &.

Dunmurry House, Demesne and Forts  James Hunter Esquire, Patrick CahillDunmurry House, the seat of William Hunter Esquire, is situated on a very handsome eminence west of the turnpike road leading from Lisburn to Belfast, 3 miles north of the former and 4 miles south of the latter town.  The house is a most commodious brick edifice, 2-storeys high and slated, oblong shape with wings and rear buildings attached.  The yards are well enclosed, offices extensive, all slated and in neat order, entrance to the house from the Falls Road by a handsome winding avenue.  The garden, about 1 Irish acre, is enclosed by a brick wall 12 feet high.  It is well stocked and neatly laid off in the general order of pleasure grounds, and bordering <bording> of boxwood.  The inside of the wall is lined with peach trees of a fine quality. The grounds at the south end and in front of the house is most tastefully laid off in the pleasure ground order, and afford a rustic tea house on an improved plan. The lawn is ornamented with partial plantations of forest and ornamental trees.The demesne, containing about 96 English acres, is laid out in well enclosed fields with good iron gates to the different entrances.There is a good orchard enclosed by a neat quickset fence.  The house, yard and gardens are sheltered on the north, west and south by plantations.  On [the] south and contiguous to the house stands a Danish fort, the seat of a handsome grove. On the north side also stands a beautiful mount, which is partially studded with different kinds of forest trees and locally called Marymount. Both these forts, in the immediate vicinity of the house, contribute much to the appearance of the seat.  Taking into account the site on which the house is situated, commanding a most delightful prospect of the surrounding scenery for many miles, the gardens, plantings and other improvements on the premises, together with the monuments of antiquity above mentioned, it is one of the healthiest and handsomest seats perhaps in the county.  The house was built 1815, and all other improvements on the demesne subsequently made by the present proprietor, the aforesaid Mr William Hunter, who is also proprietor of Dunmurry flour and corn  mills and of bleach greens in the neighbourhood. Informants James Hunter Esquire, Patrick Cahill and others. 31st October 1837. Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography.

Canal Lock  John Ward, lock keeperDrum Locks, on a portion of the canal situated in the above county and parish, is 72 feet long between the flood gates, 18 feet wide and the fall of the water from the summit to the lower level 5 and a half feet.  This lock was made above 80 years back. Informant John Ward, lock keeper.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography.

Ancient Topography  Fort in Dunmurry  Joseph Grogan, John Crone  Dunmurry Fort, on the south side of Dunmurry House, approaches to oval shape, 25 by 23 yards.  The parapet is of earth.  It is from 5 to 12 feet above the bottom of the moat, from 3 to 6 feet above the area of the fort and from 18 to 25 feet thick at the base. The moat varies from 12 to 18 feet wide.  The entire is under a plantation of different kinds of forest trees.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41.

Marymount and TraditionJoseph Grogan, John Crone  On the north side of Dunmurry House and on an eminence stands a beautiful mount locally called Marymount.  It is chiefly of earth and forms a convex on the top, 27 yards in diameter. Its summit stands about 25 feet above the bottom of the moat.  The moat averages 15 feet wide. The approach to its summit is on the east side. It forms 4 banks or promenades <prominades> from the base to the top, each from 4 to 5 feet broad.  It is in a perfect state of perservation and partly under forest trees. It would seem to have been constructed for a strength or commanding post, for which purpose it would be well adapted, as its summit and the site on which it is situated commands a great advantage of the surrounding country for many miles.  Tradition says that these forts were occupied by Oliver Cromwell <Olover Crumwell> and a portion of his forces, and that it was from one of them that he levelled part of Lambeg and Derryaghy churches, by cannon.  Informants Joseph Grogan, John Crone and others. 1st November 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Ancient Topography  .

Modern Topography  Lower Dunmurry, a SeatJames Hunter Esquire  Lower Dunmurry, the seat of James Hunter Esquire, is situated east of and contiguous to the turnpike road leading from Lisburn to Belfast and nearly central between both towns.  The house is a neat, oblong building, 2-storeys high and slated, with rear buildings attached, office houses partly slated and partly thatched. The lawn in front of the house is well sheltered by plantations and interspersed with fruit and forest trees.  The garden and orchard, about 3 English acres, is enclosed by a good quickset fence and well sheltered with forest trees.  Entrance to the house by 2 avenues, one from the above road and the other from a road leading to the Drum bridge.  The demesne, containing about 50 English acres, is laid off in well enclosed fields and improved by partial plantations.  The house was built many years ago by [blank] Mc  Clure Esquire, and latterly occupied by the late Mr John Sarvice. The place passed to the hands of the above Mr Hunter 1837, and is now undergoing general repair, and will in a short time be a very eligible situation for a gentleman's residence, as it has the advantage of the mail coach and railroads passing within one-fourth mile of the hall door.  This house is insured against fire.Dunmurry House, the seat of William Hunter Esquire, is also insured against fire. Informant James Hunter Esquire. Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41.

Roads  Michael Dimond  The turnpike road leading from Lisburn to Belfast leads through the west side of this parish from north to south.  It averages 42 feet wide clear of banks or fences, including the footpath, and is kept up from the proceeds of the tolls charged at the toll gates.That line of road leading from the Drum bridge to the Falls Road west of Dunmurry, and locally called the Wilsmount Road, averages 20 feet wide clear of banks or fences and is kept up by presentments.  This parish is well dissected and accommodated with public and by-roads.The latter roads vary from 14 to 20 feet wide, between drains or fences, and are all kept up by presentments.  Informants Michael Dimond and others.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography.

Rosemount, a Seat  James Finlay  Rosemount, latterly occupied by the Reverend Joseph Mc  Kinsey: this seat stands on the Glenburn demesne.  The house is a neat, oblong building, 1-storey high and slated, with rear buildings attached.  There is a good stable etc. in the yard. The garden is enclosed by a quickset fence. This house was built above 90 years back by the late John Wolfenden Esquire, who also was the founder of Glenburn bleach green.  It was the original house situated on the above demesne and was for many years occupied by Mr Wolfenden.  Informant James Finlay and others.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography.

Ballyfinaghy House Francis Campbell, James ReidBallyfinaghy House, the seat of John Charley Esquire, is situated east of the turnpike road leading from Lisburn to Belfast and about central between the 2 towns.  The house is a commodious, oblong building, 2-storeys high and thatched, with extensive rear buildings attached, all 2-storeys high and slated. The yards are well enclosed, the offices extensive, chiefly slated and in neat order.  The garden, about 1 English acre, is partly enclosed by a brick wall and partly by a neat quickset fence, and contains a handsome greenhouse, also glass frames for melons etc. The orchard contains about 1 acre and is enclosed by a good quickset fence. The pleasure grounds are extensive and most tastefully laid off in the general order of pleasure grounds, and is the seat of a handsome rockery of ornamental stones and flowers.  The lawn is large and ornamented with a variety of forest trees and small plantations.  Entrance to the house by 2 avenues, one opening from the above road and the other from a by-road leading to the Malone Road.  The demesne, containing about 75 English acres, is laid off in moderate sized fields, well sheltered, and good iron gates and stone piers to the different entrances.  The grounds are also ornamented by plantations of different kinds of forest trees.  The main or front house is said to have been built above 140 years.  The walls are nearly 4 feet thick and run together by grouted lime, similar to other ancient buildings. The slated buildings attached in the rear were all built by the present proprietor at different periods within the last 40 years.  This seat is situated in a most delightful part of the neighbourhood, commanding a beautiful prospect of a wide extent of the surrounding scenery, and is in all respects eligible for a gentleman's residence. Information obtained from Francis Campbell, James Reid and others. 2nd November 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography.

Ivy Bridge James Finlay, John Rice The Ivy bridge, situated at Glenburn House and across Glenburn river on an old line of road that formerly led from Lisburn to Belfast by the above seat, has 3 half-circle arches, span of centre arch 16 feet, span of the 2 outside arches each 12 feet.  Average breadth of the road on the bridge 16 feet, average height of parapets 6 feet, thickness of parapets 1 foot 7 inches, length of parapets on either side of the road 60 yards, length of the bridge 30 yards.This bridge is built chiefly of landstones and cemented together by grouted lime, similar to other old buildings.  It is said to have been built above 200 years back. Its venerable appearance, beautifully mantled over with ivy, at once denotes its antiquity. It is at present, with few exceptions, in a good state of preservation.  The mail coach running between Dublin and Belfast passed over the Ivy bridge for a series of years before 1815, at which period Edward Curtis <Curteas> Esquire, the then proprietor of Glenburn House, altered the old line of road a few yards northwards, and for its accommodation erected a new bridge across the aforesaid river at his own expense.  Cause of this alteration in the road was the old line passed through his yard, which gave him great annoyance. The latter bridge stands contiguous to the Ivy bridge and across the same river.  It has one half-circle arch, span of arch 18 feet 6 inches. Average breadth of the road on the bridge 22 feet, average height of parapets 2 feet 6 inches, thickness of parapets 1 foot 6 inches, length of parapets on either side of the road 24 yards.  This arch is faced with cut stone and in a permanent condition. Detached from this arch stands a small arch over a mill-race course that accommodates a bleach green and engine situated in its neighbourhood. Information obtained from James Finlay, John Rice and others, 3rd November 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Modern Topography.

Ancient Topography  Ancient Church and Burial GroundJohn Rice, James Reid  On a handsome eminence in the townland of Old Forge and holding of John Rice stands the site of an ancient church and burial ground.In reclaiming and labouring this parcel of ground from time to time within the last 50 years, and even within the last 10 years, there was a large quantity of every description of human bones and pieces of decayed coffins found beneath its surface. The skulls <sculls> were in a tolerable state of preservation and many of the jaw-bones retain the regular number of teeth but much decayed by time.  These bones were again interred on the site.  There was also razed <raised> within the last 10 years, 8 yards in length of the church walls.  They were cemented together by grouted lime, similar to all other ancient buildings, and measured about 3 and a half feet in thickness and almost impenetrable.It is locally supposed that this was the original church and burial ground of the above parish.  It is situated about half a mile north west of the present Drum church and west of the Lagan river.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41.

Miraculous FountJohn Rice, James Reid  On this site also stood, time immemorial, a stone 2 and a half feet long, 2 feet 2 inches broad and 1 foot thick, with a circular hole in about its centre 5 inches in diameter and nearly 4 inches deep.  This fount was seldom found wanting some quantity of water, and was  repaired to by hundreds of persons from various districts who were infected with warts and other disorders, to have themselves cleansed and cured by the water contained in the aforesaid fount.  This practice is partially continued to the present period. It is locally said that the application of the water, either in drinking or washing external diseases with it, has effected many cures.This stone has been removed from its original berth about 16 years ago and stands at Mr Rice's hall door at present, where it is occasionally visited by disordered individuals.  Information obtained from John Rice, James Reid and many others.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Ancient Topography.

Fort  On a lofty eminence in the townland of Old Forge and in Wilmount demesne stands the ruins of a fort, approaching to circular shape and convex on the top. It is 12 yards in diameter on the top and is made chiefly of clay.  Its summit stands about 5 feet above the surface of the field in which it is situated and 12 feet above the bottom of the moat on the south west side of it.  This moat is 14 yards long and averages 12 feet wide.  It would not appear that the moat extended further round the fort at any period.  At the east side of the fort stands, or rather lies, a large stone of irregular shape.  This fort is partially studded with fir trees.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Ancient Topography.

Modern Topography  Wilm ount, a Seat  John Rice, James Finlay Wilmount, the seat of the late John Stewart Esquire, is situated 3 miles north east of Lisburn, and contiguous to the old Malone Road leading from the above town to Belfast.  The house is a commodious structure, 2-storeys high and double roof.  The yards are well enclosed, the offices extensive and all slated.  The garden, about 1 Irish acre, is enclosed partly by a good stone and lime wall and partly by a quickset fence, and contained 2 large greenhouses. The lawn in front of the house is large and ornamented with a variety of forest trees; entrance to the house from the Malone Road by a long, winding avenue.  Contiguous to the house stood a good ice house. The demesne, containing 108 Irish acres, is laid off in large well enclosed fields and the seat of extensive young and grown plantations of almost every description of forest trees.  It was also the seat of an extensive bleach green, which has been disused 22 years ago.The house was built above 80 years ago by the late William Stewart Esquire, who in 10 years afterwards enlarged it considerably by adding a new front to it.  This structure stands on a handsome eminence over the Lagan river, and was one of the most commodious buildings in the county, but is at present, together with all the appendages, in a state of complete <compleat> ruin, not being occupied by any gentleman's family for the last 7 years.  The property is in the hands of the court of chancery, and a term of 7 years only given to any tenant.  It was held for the last 7 years by Mr James Stewart of Belfast. All building, planting and other improvements on the premises were done by the aforesaid late William Stewart Esquire.  It was he [who] also established the bleach green before mentioned. He was likewise the proprietor of Ballydrain, now held by Mr Montgomery of Belfast, who is erecting a fine castle on the demesne.  Information obtained from John Rice, James Finlay and others. 6th November 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41.

Social Economy  Temperance Society  Hugh Kirkwood Redhill Temperance Society is held in Hugh Kirkwood's, townland of Old Forge, and was established in 1835.  It consists at present of 60 members, of both sexes, of different ages and of all religious denominations.  The Reverend Joseph Mc  Kinsey is the principal manager.  As yet the meetings are held half-yearly.  The rules of this society with regard to abstinence from ardent liquors is in all particulars the same as others previously established, but there is no office as yet appointed, the society being in its infantile state. It is well recognized in the neighbourhood where it is situated, and seems to prosper well. Information obtained from Hugh Kirkwood and others. Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  4.

Redhill Lake and Fish  Hugh Kirkwood In Old Forge and holding of Hugh Kirkwood there is a lake locally called the Redhill lough. The eminence on which it is situated is known by the Red hill, and gave name to the lake.  This sheet of water collected on the remains of an ancient bog, and occupies about 3 English acres. Its depth in some parts is not known, but it is yearly increasing in size.  It was always inhabited by eels, but the above Mr Kirkwood brought trout and perch to it at some former period and are now getting numerous.  It is likewise visited by different kinds of wildfowl. Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Social Economy  5.

Ancient Topography  Wooden Vessel from Redhill Bog Hugh Kirkwood In cutting out the remains of bog on which the above lake is situated, there was fir and oak got imbedded in it; also in 1829 there was an ancient wooden vessel found at a great depth beneath the original surface.  It was oval shape, about 1 and a half feet in depth and made of broad but very rough <ruff> and ill-shaped staves.  It had 2 lugs or handles similar to a modern water can. There was a band of twisted rods between the 2 handles, for the vessel to be carried by.  There were other articles of odd construction found in the same place, but all fell down into small pieces shortly after being exposed to the air.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  6.

Fort  On Lower Dunmurry demesne, now occupied by James Hunter Esquire, there stood a fort which has been destroyed some years back.  Informant Hugh Kirkwood and others. Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Ancient Topography  7.

Social Economy  Emigration in 1835 and 1836 John Collins, William Martin  The following [table] are the names, ages, religion and the number of persons that have emigrated to America from this parish during the years 1835 and 1836, also the townland in which they resided and ports to whence the different persons have gone, as enumerated from the 11th October to the 7th November 1837.  1835: James Simpson, 50, Mary Simpson, 24, James Simpson, 3, Presbyterians, from Dunmurry to New York.  Alexander Craig, 35, Eliza Craig, 25, William Craig, 6, John Craig, 4, Eliza Craig, 2, Presbyterians, from Dunmurry to New York.  Edward Curteas Esquire, 26, Established Church, from Old Forge to New York.  Robert Finlay, 30, Ann Finlay, 28, Robert Finlay, 8, James Finlay, 6, Ann Finlay, 4, Presbyterians, from Old Forge to New York. 1836: William Coats, 28, Established Church, from Ballyfinaghy to New York. John Lyster, 40, Established Church, from Old Forge to New York.  James Hool, 48, Mary Hool, 46, Robert Hool, 23, James Hool, 21, Jonas Hool, 18, Established Church, from Dunmurry to Quebec.  Eliza Corr, 35, Mary Corr, 30, Established Church, from Dunmurry to Quebec.  Thomas Stephenson, 50, William Stephenson, 23, Eliza Stephenson, 48, Presbyterians, from Old Forge to Quebec.  Agnes Mc  Golpen, 68, Presbyterian, from Old Forge to Quebec.  Margaret Graham, 22, Presbyterian, from Old Forge to Quebec.  William Mc  Cullogh, 21, Presbyterian, from Old Forge to Quebec.The aforesaid persons were chiefly farmers who sold out their tenements in order to better their condition in another country.  A few of them were employed at the bleaching business.  Both classes went on speculation of improving their condition, but not necessitated by any distress here.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  8.

Migration  Employment in this subdivision of the above parish is more than sufficient for the number of cottiers resident in it; consequently they are not obliged to go to any other country or neighbourhood to seek for employment.  There is no instance of migration from the parish.  Informants John Collins, William Martin and others; written 7th November 1837.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Social Economy.

Modern Topography  Dunmurry Lodge Edward and James Craig  Dunmurry Lodge, the seat of the Unitarian minister for the time being: the house is a very neat, oblong building, 1-storey high and slated. It is situated on a handsome site in the village of Dunmurry, and a small farm attached to it. The garden is enclosed by a quickset fence and the pleasure grounds laid off in the garden-like manner. The entire is the gift of the Dunmurry Unitarian congregation to their minister, as they hold it, together with the site of the meeting house and of the schoolhouse also, at a small annual rent under the Marquis of Donegall, on lease renewable for ever. The lodge is eligibly situated for a small family and has the advantage of the railroad now passing within 30 yards of the hall door.  Informants Edward and James Craig and others.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41.

Social Economy  Floods in the LaganJonathon Brown, John Rice  The floods which occasionally occur in the Lagan river are said to inundate the holmes along its banks for some distance on either side, and when occurring in harvest before the crops are removed, that hay and other crops are more or less injured by it, but in the main time that it improves the soil materially.  These holmes are chiefly under meadow or pasture, but when any of them are cultivated and put under other crops these crops are most luxuriant for several years.  The proportion of fish in this part of the river is the same as in Lambeg.Informants Jonathon Brown, John Rice and others.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41.

Dunmurry Reading Society  Edward Craig  Dunmurry Reading Society, established 1828 and held in Dunmurry schoolhouse: this is one of the most prosperous of the above description in the province.  There are between 80 and 90 members at present on the books.  They are composed of all classes and religious sects, and have above 700 volumes in their library at present.  These consist chiefly of histories and novels.  The following are amongst the catalogue of books: America by Robertson, 4 volumes; Ancient History by Rollin, 8 volumes; 1 Egyptians, 2 Medes, Persians and Greece, 3 Persians, Greece, 4 Greece, 5 Alexander the Great, 6 Alexander's Successors, 7 Alexander's Successors, 8 Syracuse, Pontus etc., Charles V by Robertson, 4 volumes; Josephus' Works, 4 volumes; Roman Empire, Rise and Fall of, by Gibbon, 8 volumes; Roman Republic by Ferguson, 5 volumes; Scott's Novels, 8 volumes; O'Brien's and O'Flaherty's by Lady Morgan, 4 volumes, and many other interesting works.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Social Economy.


Regulations of Dunmurry Reading Society  Rules and regulations of the society: 1. The terms of subscription to this society shall be 5s of entrance and 5s per annum, to be paid in advance, on or before the 1st Saturday in January in each year, and the funds so raised shall, after defraying the necessary expenses, be applied in purchasing books of approved merit only.2. Members who enter on or before the 1st Saturday in February shall pay a full year's contribution, and those who enter after that date shall pay in advance at the rate of 5d per month from the time of their entrance till the commencement of the ensuing year.  3. No person shall have the use of the library, or vote at any meeting of the society, while his yearly subscription remains unpaid, and if 12 months in arrear, shall forfeit his interest in said society, provided in either case he has received 1 month's notice of his default from the secretary or treasurer, who shall [keep] a list of such defaulters.  4. Voting in all cases to be by ballot. 5. The officers of the society shall be a president, treasurer, secretary, librarian and committee of 7, 5 to be a quorum, under the control of the society at large.  The president, treasurer, secretary and librarian shall be additional members of the committee.6. The election of officers shall be held every year on the first Saturday in January, and they shall hold their offices for 1 year, and any member elected an officer of this society shall declare, at the time his election is made known to him, whether he will act or not, and if the elected member declines to act, another will immediately be elected in his place.  7. A general meeting of the society shall be held the first Saturday of every month at 7 o'clock in the evening, from 21st September till 23rd March, and at 8 o'clock in the evening from the 23rd of March till the 21st of September, and an extraordinary meeting may be called by the president, secretary or any 5 members, on giving a week's notice by circular note or public advertisement.  8. The general meeting in December shall appoint 3 inspectors, who shall meet on Christmas Day or any convenient day in that week, to examine the stock of the association and audit the accounts of the treasurer and secretary, and that they may be enabled to report thereon speedily and more accurately, the librarian is hereby empowered to order in the books and close the library for 1 week from the Saturday preceding Christmas Day, under a penalty of 2s 6d for each default, the notice of doing so to be given at the general meeting in December.9. A resolution proposed at one general meeting shall be copied and exhibited in the library by the librarian each night it is open, until the next general meeting, at which, if approved, it becomes a law, and proposals for rescinding a law shall be subject to the same regulations.  10. 

Any person wishing to become a member of this society shall be proposed by a member at one general meeting and balloted for at the next, and if a majority of the attending members vote in his favour, he shall be admitted a member.  11. Any member lending a book the property of the society to any person who is not a member, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding 10s.  12. Any member who loses a book the property of the society shall pay the value o f it, or if a volume of a set, the set must be taken and paid for or the lost volume replaced in the course of 1 month, and if  any book be injured beyond what may be reasonably allowed for the using, the extent of such injury shall be determined by the committee, and the amount paid by the members.  13. Disorderly and refractory members may be expelled by a general meeting summoned for that purpose, provided two-thirds of the members attending vote for their expulsion.14. A member may sell or bequeath his interest in the society, but the eligibility of the person to whom bequest or sale is made shall be determined in the ordinary mode of election.  In case of rejection, the person assigned legatee or heir-at-law shall have the right of proposing others until a person agreeable to the society shall be named.  15. Members removing 5 miles or further from the village of Dunmurry shall on their return be entitled to the use of the library (all the arrears having been paid up at the time of their removal), on paying in advance the subscription for that part of the current year unexpired when they return.  16. The society pledges itself to each individual member not to dissolve without the unanimous consent of 2 general meetings covened for that purpose.  17. The books intended for the society shall be proposed by the members at one general meeting and balloted for at the next, and the committee shall select from the books voted in by the society those which they shall judge eligible and reject what they conceive to be unprofitable or unnecessary.   

Books rejected by the committee may be submitted to the vote of the society at the next general meeting, provided notice to that effect shall have been immediately given after such rejection, and if passed the second time, must be purchased.  19. The committee shall meet on the first Saturday of every month, immediately after the general monthly meeting.  They shall make a monthly report of the funds, examine new books and books lately bound, see a list of the former delivered to the secretary, inspect the librarian's registries and levy and mitigate fines.  20. The treasurer shall not issue any money without an order signed by the president or chairman of the committee, nor shall he sign any order without the authority of the committee.  21. The librarian shall attend in the library every Saturday night from 7 till 8 o'clock, to give out and receive books. He shall keep a registry of the books lent, have the books stamped or marked Dunmurry Reading Society before they are lent, report to the committee all damages the books may have received or sustained, suspend the circulation of any books that may require binding and call in books detained beyond the time specified. 22. The member who first applies for a book shall have it first, and others in the order of their application, and the librarian shall not deliver any book except on the personal application of a member or to some person producing an order signed by a member, nor shall any member have more than 4 volumes at a time.23. No member shall have the use of folio volume for more than 8 weeks, a quarto for more than 6 weeks, an octavo for more than 4 weeks and any of smaller size for more than 2 weeks, under a penalty of 1d per day from the date of the librarian's notice until returned, but the loan may be renewed to the member if no other has applied for it. 24. Donations of money or books approved of by the society will be thankfully received. PS There are 40 volumes of the British essayists and 29 volumes of the British Museum in the library.  The society subscribed a sum of money towards repairing the Dunmurry schoolhouse, where they hold their meetings on all occasions before stated.  Their contribution to the aforesaid repairs entitles them to the use of the schoolhouse for their meetings, as long as they think proper to hold them there.  The library is held in Mrs Craig's, Dunmurry; Mr Edward Craig is the librarian for the current year.  The society was established and continues to be conducted on the most liberal and impartial grounds. No religious books, or other works that might tend to create disunion or unpleasant feelings amongst any class or religious sect connected with the society, is introduced, purchased or taken as a gift from any individuals.  All books purchased by or for the society since it was established is and will be kept in the library, till its dissolution takes place.  The latter rule has furnished their library with the unusually large and valuable collection of books it at present contains.  Members choosing to withdraw will be allowed their outlays in cash, but no books given from the library.  Information taken from the library register for 1836, and partly from the librarian. 8th November 1837.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Social Economy.

Productive and Social Economy  Farms  The following are the order of holdings in the parish.  The farms vary from 3 to 110 Irish acres, but few of the latter size.  The average size of the majority of the farms is from 15 to 30 Irish acres. NB All farms are leased under the Marquis of Donegall, at Irish measures. Irish measure is consequently the rule by which land is let or taxed in this parish, as it is the property of the above nobleman.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41.

First Rate Houses  Number of first class houses: 1 Glenburn House, the seat of Major Crossley; 2 Dunmurry, the seat of Alexander Hunter Esquire; 3 Lower Dunmurry, the seat of James Hunter Esquire; 4 Dunmurry House, the seat of William Hunter Esquire; 5 Ballyfinaghy House, the seat of John Charley Esquire; 6 Wilmount (vacant), the seat of the late John Stewart Esquire; 7 Rosemount (vacant), the seat latterly of the Reverend Joseph Mc  Kinsey; 8 Dunmurry Lodge (vacant), the seat of the Unitarian minister.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Productive and Social Economy.

Farmers' and Cottiers' Houses  About one-fourth of the entire houses in the parish are slated, and about one-seventh of them 2-storeys high.  The majority of the farmhouses are whitewashed with lime outside, well lit with handsome sash windows, which afford ventilation by being lifted or let down, and the interior in every respect neat and comfortable and almost all furnished with handsome clocks; the farmyards tolerably large, well enclosed, and the gardens well sheltered with forest trees and in many instances affording a variety of fruit.  The cottiers' houses, too, are with very few exceptions whitewashed outside and inside and well lit with small glass windows, and in other respects tolerably comfortable. Fuel, food and clothing is the same in this parish as that described in Lambeg parish. 9th November 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Productive and Social Economy  @.

Character of the Parishioners and AmusementsWilliam Martin, John Rice  The parishioners in general are said to be industrious, peaceable, honestly disposed and attentive to their religious duties, and to live on good neighbourhood with each other. They are free and communicative, but not in possession of much of the history of the parish.  There is no ancient customs of costume <custume> or legendary tales or stories amongst them.  Bullet play is partially practised by the youth of the parish, but very little of any other amusements.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Productive and Social Economy.

Local Government and Clergy No smuggling or illicit distillation in the parish.  No magistrates resident in the parish, no peace or revenue police in the parish.  No clergy of any description resident in the parish.  The Unitarian meeting house at Dunmurry is the only house of worship in the parish.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Productive and Social Economy.

Dispensary  No dispensary in the parish. The poor of the parish receive advice and medicine at the infirmary of the county of Antrim, situated at Lisburn, 10th and 11th November 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Productive and Social Economy.

Associations and Societies  William Martin, John Rice  No savings banks or money clubs in the parish, no combinations among artisans or labourers in the parish.  No Orange or Ribbon <Ribbin> lodges at present in the parish; none of the latter at any period. There is 1 Freemason lodge in the parish at present.  There are 3 public houses in the parish.  There is 1 temperance society in the parish; there is also a reading society in the parish.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Productive and Social Economy.

Employment  Constant sources of employment for the working class in the parish: 2 bleach greens and flour and corn mills.  Very few weavers of any description in the parish: cause assigned is that other and more beneficial employment is more than sufficient for the working class resident in the parish.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Productive and Social Economy.

Modern Topography  General Appearance and Scenery  The parish is well accommodated with river water and springs.  No bogs or native wood in the parish.  There are several handsome hills in the parish, but no mountains.  This subdivision of the above parish is fertile, well improved with buildings and plantations, possessed of wealth and capital, and well situated for agriculture and traffic.  It is bounded on the east by the Lagan river and navigation, on the south and south west by Derryaghy <Derriaghy> and on the north and north west by Shankill <Shankhill> parish, and has the advantage of the railroad passing through it nearly from north to south. Informants William Martin, John Rice and many others. Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41.

Social Economy  General ObservationsDaniel Magee, Michael Dimond  This parish is situated in the manor of Belfast; consequently the recovery or suing for small debts and other disputes arising within the parish are determined and decided in the latter town.Drumbeg church is situated in the county Down portion of the parish.  The principal parish schools is also situated in the latter county.  The Reverend James Scott is rector of the parish and resides in county Down.The Roman Catholic population of the parish worship at Derryaghy Roman Catholic chapel and pay stipend to the parish priest of the latter parish.  Information obtained from Daniel Magee, Michael Dimond and many others. All Fair Sheets headed as above relate exclusively to that portion of the parish situated in the county of Antrim. 11th November 1837.Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  G.

School Statistics  [Table contains the following headings: name, situation and description, when established, income and expenditure, physical, intellectual and moral education, number of pupils subdivided by age, sex and religion, name an(tmd religious persuasion of master or mistress].  Dunmurry national school, situated in the village of Dunmurry and held in a slated house 1 storey high, 24 feet 4 inches by 15 feet 10 inches inside and lit by 3 good glass windows, floorboarded and entrance by 1 door; the house is heated by a stove. This school was under the Kildare Place Society but got under the Education Board 1832.  Income: from Alexander Hunter Esquire 10 pounds, from the Education Board 10 pounds, from pupils 40 pounds; intellectual education: books published by the Education Board; moral education: visits from the Reverend Dr Montgomery of Belfast, no catechism taught, Scripture lessons are taught; number of pupils: males, 30 under 10 years of age, 10 from 10 to 15, 40 total males; females, 16 under 10 years of age, 8 from 10 to 15, 22 total females; 62 total number of pupils, 10 Protestants, 16 Presbyterians, 6 Roman Catholics, 30 other denominations; master: William Miniss, a Unitarian.  [Signed] Thomas Fagan, 20th October 1837.  Parish of Drumbeg, County Antrim  Fair Sheets by Thomas Fagan, October to November 1837 Box 9 V 1 pp1-41  Social Economy.

